README for the Newts notesfile system                              -*- Text -*-
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Please take the time to fill out the Newts SURVEY, included in this directory;
your feedback will help me continue to improve the Newts software.]

This is Newts 0.15, a notesfile message board system in the tradition of PLATO
Notes and Notesfiles by Ray Essick and Rob Kolstad.

Newts 0.15 is a production-quality beta release; the UIUC client and UIUC
backend are complete and in the ongoing process of being polished.  The 0.15
release includes a complete and final client API, suitable for utility and
bindings development.

The 1.0 release of Newts will split the unified trusted client model into an
untrusted client and trusted server. The 1.0 release may involve API
modifications, but the interface should remain substantially the same.

It bears repeating that Newts is still in beta, although based on fairly heavy
testing I think I've eliminated most of the egregious bugs.  You're definitely
encouraged to back up any existing notesfile data files before testing Newts.
If you find a bug in Newts, please let me know so I can get it fixed and
incorporated into the next release.

Despite that disclaimer, Newts has proven to be consistently more stable than
Notesfiles.  My testing has shown that it is able to detect corrupted notes
before loading them (and thereby causing a segfault) -- this means that
individual notesfiles shouldn't ever acquire 'embedded segfaults'.
Furthermore, compression and similar actions handle corrupted notes gracefully.

The pervasive use of POSIX file locking in the UIUC backend should eliminate
the phenomenon sometimes referred to as "nortz", where multiple instances write
into a single notesfile at the same time, producing a corrupted note.  Each
released version should be at least mostly free of segfaults; exceptions are
documented in BUGS.  Finally, I'm not aware of any situations where Newts will
simply hang.

On the other hand, if this is an interim release or if you got the source from
Subversion, all bets are off.

Newts is designed to support a modular interface for database backends.
Currently, Newts includes only one backend; namely, a flatfile database
compatible with the database used by Essick and Kolstad's Notesfiles 1.7.  In
the future, I'd like to offer various other backends, such as MySQL, dbm, and
Berkeley DB.

Newts currently includes a single client, which is designed to be reminiscent
of the client used in Notesfiles 1.7.  There have been some fairly significant
changes, such as the addition of the ability to handle backspaces correctly,
and some modifications to error messages and the like.  If you prefer a client
as close in appearance to Notesfiles as possible, the Newts version of notes
provides the --traditional switch to act even more like Notesfiles.  (Behaviors
which I considered to be bugs, such as the inability to handle backspaces, are
still different in traditional mode.)

I have to date only tested Newts on Linux -- specifically, Debian, Gentoo, and
Linux From Scratch, on x86 and PPC -- and on Darwin, better known as Mac OS X.
If you have a different configuration, you might run into trouble.  Please let
me know if you do.  For that matter, please let me know if you don't, as well.

There are a couple gotchas in the configuration process you should definitely
know about before trying to compile Newts.

First, if you are using Newts to replace an existing UIUC notesfiles
installation, and you have modified either the parms.h or structs.h files in
the UIUC distribution, you will have to modify the Newts header
include/newts/uiuc-compatibility.h to reflect those changes, if you want Newts
to work with the data files created by UIUC notesfiles.  There is unfortunately
no real convenient way to automate this process.

Second, there are some important configuration options you ought to be aware
of.

Before you install Newts, you'll need to create or select a user to be the
administrator of the notesfile system.  This defaults to the user 'notes' in
the group 'notes'.  If you don't create this user (or an equivalent), in this
version of Newts, file permissions won't be set up correctly and things will
magically fail to work.  This is probably a bad thing.  In order for anonymous
notes to work correctly, you also need a 'nobody' user; you probably already
have one of these.

You can specify the user and group of the notes administrator with the
configure options --with-notes-user and --with-notes-group.  You can specify
the 'nobody' user using --with-anon-user.

The --with-notes-spool configure option can be used to choose the location on
your filesystem where the notesfile spool directory should be kept; this
defaults to /var/spool/notes, which complies with the FHS.

Newts uses a lot of external programs for various tasks.  You might want to
adjust these to select your favorites; I imagine that the most popular
customization will be --with-default-editor, which by default uses Emacs if it
can find it.  I recommend -not- setting the default pager to less; although
less is my personal pager of choice, more works better in the specific
circumstances in which it's invoked by Newts. Trust me on this. :)

Thank you for trying out Newts.  Please send me any praise, complaints, feature
requests, or bug reports you come up with.

- Tyler <tyler+newts@thoughtlocker.net>
